Add Photon Realtime tutorials page (#407)
playcanvas/developer.playcanvas.com: content/en/tutorials/real-time-multiplayer-photon.md

---
title: Real-time Multiplayer with Photon
layout: tutorial-page.hbs
tags: multiplayer, networking
thumb: https://www.photonengine.com/v2/img/nav-logo-photon.svg
---

<iframe loading="lazy" src="https://playcanv.as/e/p/dvJYXs1Y/" title="Real-time Multiplayer with Photon - including matchmaking"></iframe>

*Mouse click to move*

The complete project including matchmaking can be found [here][1].

Photon, also known as PUN in Unity, is used in a variety of game titles, and a JavaScript SDK for Photon is also available for free for projects with up to 20 CCU

### In this tutorial, you will learn

- How to use Photon SDK
- Multiplayer implementation

### Tutorial Project

<iframe loading="lazy" src="https://playcanv.as/e/p/sLGr3Ql2/" title="Real-time Multiplayer with Photon - a simple project"></iframe>

*Arrow keys to move.*

> You can find the [tutorial project here][2].

Author: Thank you! I will remove this one.

# Setup

## PlayCanvas Project

Use an empty PlayCanvas project.

![Empty Project][3]

## Photon account

Account registration is required to use the SDK and view documentation.

Create your Photon account [here][4] - (Photon Engine).

### 1. Create a new app

Click **CREATE NEW APP** from the dashboard

![Create New Application][5]

### 2. Select Photon Type and Application name.

Enter the following

- Photon Type: RealTime
- Name: PlayCanvas-Photon etc.

![Create Real Time Project][6]

### 3. Copy of AppID

Please make a note of this AppId, as you will need it in the future.

![App Id][7]

## Download SDK

Download the SDK from the dashboard.

### 1. Click SDK from the dashboard

![SDK][8]

### 2. Select RealTime JavaScript

![JavaScript SDK][9]

### 3. Click download SDK

![Download SDK][10]

### 4. Unzip the SDK

![Unzip SDK][11]

> The SDK will be downloaded in ZIP format, unzip it: `photon-javascript-sdk_v4-1-1-0` → `lib` → **`Photon-Javascript_Emscripten_SDK.min.js`**.

Author: Sorry, there was a problem with the way I took the screenshot in Chrome.
I took it again and it worked.

## Importing SDK

Import the SDK you have just downloaded into the PlayCanvas editor.

### 1. Upload the SDK on the editor

![Upload SDK][12]

Drag and drop the SDK to the assets in the editor.

### 2. Change Loading Type "Asset" to "Before Engine"

![Change Loading Type][13]

# Multiplayer implementation

Multiplayer implementation is as follows

1. use Photon class for real-time communication (LoadBalancing)
2. connect to Photon master server
3. Create or Join a room
4. Synchronize other players

The API reference and glossary are available here.

- [API Reference][14]
- [Photon Engine - glossary][15]

## Using Photon with PlayCanvas

### 1. Using the LoadBalancing class in the SDK

> Develop using a class that extends **LoadBalancingClient**.
> Please create **photon-loadbalancing.js**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started, we need to create a class that extends **LoadBalancingClient**. Please create a new script asset named **photon-loadbalancing.js** and add the following code:
```

```javascript
// photon-loadbalancing.js
class LoadBalancing extends class LoadBalancing extends Photon.LoadBalancing.LoadBalancingClient {
    constructor(props) {
        // Photon Settings
        const wss = props.wss;
        const appId = props.appId;
        const appVersion = props.appVersion;
        super(wss, appId, appVersion);

        // pc.Application
        this.app = props.app;
    }
}
```

### 2. Instantiate classes from PlayCanvas to use Photon

> Create a **photon-loadbalancing-playcanvas.js** to the project to initialize Photon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a script asset named **photon-loadbalancing-playcanvas.js** to the project to initialize Photon.
```

PhotonLoadBalancingPlayCanvas.attributes.add("appId", { type: "string" });
PhotonLoadBalancingPlayCanvas.attributes.add("appVersion", {
  type: "string",
  default: "1.0",
});
PhotonLoadBalancingPlayCanvas.attributes.add("wss", {
  type: "boolean",
  default: true,
});

PhotonLoadBalancingPlayCanvas.attributes.add("region", {
  type: "string",
  default: "jp",
  description:
    "Photon Cloud has servers in several regions, distributed across multiple hosting centers over the world.You can choose optimized region for you.",
  enum: [
    { "Select Region": "default" },
    { "Asia, Singapore": "asia" },
    { "Australia, Melbourne": "au" },
    { "Canada, East Montreal": "cae" },
    { "Chinese Mainland (See Instructions)	Shanghai": "cn" },
    { "Europe, Amsterdam": "eu" },
    { "India, Chennai": "in" },
    { "Japan, Tokyo": "jp" },
    { "Russia Moscow": "ru" },
    { "Russia, East Khabarovsk": "rue" },
    { "South Africa Johannesburg": "za" },
    { "South America, Sao Paulo": "sa" },
    { "South Korea, Seoul": "kr" },
    { "Turkey Istanbul": "tr" },
    { "USA, East Washington": "us" },
    { "USA, West San José": "usw" },
  ],
});
```

### 3. Set Script for Root entity

> Create a new **photon-loadbalancing-playcanvas.js** and attach it to the root entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new script asset **photon-loadbalancing-playcanvas.js** and attach it to the Root entity in the Editor.
```

> ![Root Entity - Inspector][16]

Reviewer: Missing image from preview

### 4. Paste AppId into the script attribute.

Enter AppId as a script attribute.

> ![Script Attributes][17]

Reviewer: Missing image from preview

```javascript
this.app.loadBalancing = new LoadBalancing({
  wss: this.wss ? 1 : 0,
  appId: this.appId,
  appVersion: this.appVersion,
  app: this.app,
});
```

- **wss** Secure connection via WebSocket.
- **appId** The value application identifier.

> - **appVersion** Game version. Can be a separate Virtual Application.

Reviewer: What's a virtual application?

            if (player) {
                const { x, y, z } = content.position;
                player.setLocalPosition(x, y, z);
            }
            break;
        }
    }
}
```

- **raiseEvent(eventCode,data, options)** send `eventCode` and `data`.
- **onEvent(code, content, actorNr)** receive data. Includes `actorNr` and `eventCode`.

### 2. Changed to fire events when player moves

```javascript
class Player extends pc.ScriptType {
  update(dt) {
    const pos = new pc.Vec3(0, 0, 0);
    if (this.app.keyboard.isPressed(pc.KEY_LEFT)) {
      pos.x = -dt;
    }
    if (this.app.keyboard.isPressed(pc.KEY_RIGHT)) {
      pos.x = dt;
    }
    if (this.app.keyboard.isPressed(pc.KEY_UP)) {
      pos.z = -dt;
    }
    if (this.app.keyboard.isPressed(pc.KEY_DOWN)) {
      pos.z = dt;
    }

    if (!pos.equals(new pc.Vec3(0, 0, 0))) {
      this.entity.translate(pos);
      const { x, y, z } = this.entity.getPosition();

      // Communicate when it moves.
      this.app.fire("loadbalancing:sendPlayerPosition", { x, y, z });
    }
  }
}

pc.registerScript(Player);
```

- **this.app.fire** [communication][22] between scripts.

> ### If successful

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Done!
```

> You can play multiplayer in Photon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now play multiplayer in Photon!
```

![Project][23]

> Now you can create a room using Photon and synchronize the location information of the characters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create a room using Photon and synchronize the positions of players with each other.
```
